Clarity article

The search for clarity
By Neil Arora

When I was a schoolboy I loved mathematics.  Mathematics was the land of certainty.  The land of answers.  You were either correct or incorrect.  Your proof was either sound or deficient, and if it was deficient you could work out why.  For me this certainty brough pleasure and satisfaction.  Not just the pleasure of getting something 'right', of course there was this - but the pleasure of there being a solution that held fast.  This was the pleasure I was after.  Later on I understood this as clarity.

For lawyers this search for clarity is intrinsically understood.  While it was not what drove me to study law, it very early became the driving force in my studies and professional aspirations.  Ahhh!  The click of clarity when a legal problem is resolved, or the clarity in mounting the better argument (and winning!)  Later on working as an Associate to a High Court judge Justice Gummow, and later a solicitor at Clayton Utz and then as in-house counsel for the Commonwealth Government, I found that this driving force was woven throughout the law.  Sure, it would be naive to say there are not policy and other factors that influence court decisions, but more often than not my experience has been that judges will look for the result that carries the greatest clarity.  Clarity is a good guide for justice.  If it can be understood then there is likely something just or 'right' about it.

For me, however, this clarity sought in the law was just the tip of the iceberg.  In law one seeks clarity when gathering evidence, when taking a statement, when writing an affidavit, or when drafting submissions or a commercial agreement.  It is not a long stretch to seek to apply this to our inner lives.  Being a lawyer taught me the value of clarity, but seeking inner clarity, and by this I mean clarity of inner thought, clarity of inner feeling and clarity of inner will, is for me the true search for clarity.  Truly, it is the next natural frontier.  How can one possibly think with clarity when the mind and emotions are a jumbled mess? 

Being interested in meditation and self knowledge is about seeking inner clarity.  I found very quickly after I started meditating that my mind was a mess!  It was a tangled web of mostly useless thoughts and unhelpful emotions that were unconsciously moving me.  It was a surprise that there was ever any clarity in my thinking.  What I found was that what I had held up as the standard of high clarity in me, was really just a starting point.  

Colleagues often say to me "you must be so relaxed Neil", when they hear about the months I spend away on Meditation and Inner Space Techniques retreats.  While relaxation is no doubt very attractive and necessary, I cannot imagine anything more boring than being relaxed for months on end.  No thanks.  Meditation is so much more than relaxation.  Meditation is about awakening - speeding up.  What is it that speeds up?  Everything!  The mind becomes silent, useless thoughts lessen, the true thinking - the one that brings pleasure - speeds up, emotional reactions drop away.  In silence there is awakening of your true nature - awakening of your true passion for life.  Then life can really engage!  

For me this all began with the realisation that what stood between me and clarity was my unconscious emotional tendencies.  They were unconscious because they were unknown to my conscious mind.  I thought I was in complete control of my destiny and my life decisions.  I was succesful, intelligent, and the world at my feet.  At least that is what the world, family and friends reflected to me.  Inside, however, I knew something was missing.  Some x-factor.  Yes, there could be pleasure and highs, but alsothere were lows.  I tried to deny the lows.  I tried to cover them up.  But, this was just unsatisfactory. 

Ten years ago I found the Inner Space Techniques or IST.  IST is meditation and more.  It is, at its heart, a process of self-knowledge.  A seeking of the inner-clarity that I had sought after.  It is a systematic method for clarifying the unconscious emotional reactions that drive our lives and create the issues and problems we face.  

IST is for anyone seeking greater clarity, self knowledge, or simply facing an immovable issue or problem.  Many people come to IST because they have tried conventional methods of psychotherapy, counselling or psychology and they have had enough of talking.  IST uses the 'inner space' of meditation that the practitioner brings and from there the client dives into their unconscious and moves towards the source of the issue or blockage that is interfering in their life.  Resolution comes not from fixing the issue, but from seeing the source or cause of the issue - once the cause is seen it is as if the problem no longer exists.  

Clarifying my emotions was a true flexing of the clarity muscle that I was seeking.  I found it made me a much better lawyer.  I became more emotionally aware of myself and who I am.  This led to being able to really be present with clients, really hear them, construct arguments without taking the outcome personally or feeling emotionally drained by the result, whether positive or negative, and it ignited a passion to face obstacles.  Now when an obstacle was presented it was the time to stand up and meet it with the force of clarity.

But, my search for clarity continues.  Last year I quit being a lawyer fulltime to focus on my meditation practice, to work as an IST professional, and to teach IST and meditation to groups.  Clarity is everyone's birthright. 

....

Neil Arora is an IST Practitioner and works with clients one-on-one to help them find inner clarity.  Neil is also available to teach meditation to groups - www.neilarora.com.au 











